---
layout: post
title: "FOIA Lawsuit Filed Against the FBI for Records on Jon Burge"
image: images/burge.png
author: jake_ader
teaser: "Documents Regarding CPD Detective's Legacy of Torture Must Be Liberated"
tags:
  - FOIA
  - Chicago
  - FBI
---

Through his career, notorious Chicago Police Commander Jon Burge and his
fellow officers used electro-shock devices, burns, plastic bags to suffocate
people and mock executions to torture hundreds into false confessions.
Ultimately, Burge was convicted of federal perjury charges and last week Lucy
Parsons Labs sued the Federal Bureau of Investigation for its records on Jon
Burge under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).

Burge, who learned his torture techniques during his participation in wars in
South Korea and Vietnam, brought these tactics back with him to America. He
would later teach these methods to his battalion of officers in the Chicago
Police Department–the so called “Midnight Crew”.

Among those tortured was Andrew Wilson. Wilson, [29 years old at the
time](https://www.nytimes.com/1982/02/15/us/2-arrested-in-chicago-s-search-for-killers-of-police.html),
was alleged to be involved in the shooting of a CPD commander and consequently
faced a death penalty charge. Ultimately the Illinois Supreme Court stepped into
Wilson’s case and as details of the heinous torture emerged the charges against
Wilson and other suspects’ charges were dropped.

In addition to [Wilson’s
suit](https://law.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/FSupp/707/379/1574057/),
several other acquitted victims [filed
lawsuits](http://www.law.northwestern.edu/legalclinic/wrongfulconvictions/exonerations/il/ronald-kitchen.html)
of their own for the torture they endured. Forced confessions were revealed to
have been the product of these torture tactics by CPD well before 1982, perhaps
as early as 1970.

More legal battles, lasting over 30 years within the city, have led to a swath
of Chicago Police Officers being exposed as participating in these brutal
programs.The widespread attempted cover-up of the torture wormed its way through
deep pockets of then Mayor Daley’s administration.

Many of these detectives, including Burge, never faced consequences for
torturing hundreds, in part because of the statute of limitations on their
crimes expired. Burge instead went to prison for [lying and covering
up](https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-met-burge-trial-0629-20100628-story.html)
the torture. He was allowed to collect his police pension even after leaving
prison.

The City of Chicago has paid over $110 million in lawsuits this far, but victims
of Burge’s battalion’s torture [continue to come
forward.](https://chicago.cbslocal.com/2019/05/30/another-burge-victim-to-file-a-civil-lawsuit/)

The indictment and arrest of Jon Burge by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
begs the question – what records might the FBI possess pertaining to Burge –
both before and after his criminal trials? Lucy Parsons Labs [filed a public
records
request](https://www.muckrock.com/foi/united-states-of-america-10/foia-fbi-jon-burge-61298/)
with the FBI after the death of Burge last September in an attempt to answer
this question.

Given the crucial history and public’s interest to have access to these records,
we have filed a FOIA lawsuit to liberate these records. Lucy Parsons Labs is
represented by Matt Topic and Josh Burday of the Chicago-based law firm Loevy
and Loevy.

Lucy Parsons Labs believes in government transparency and we are confident these
records could shine light and new details on a CPD commander accused of
torturing at least 118 individuals in police custody.

Opening up the FBI records of public figures often reveal new details of their
history into the light. We hope to inform the public further about the
disastrous history of a police official who fought to his death against anyone
who dared question his integrity. New pieces possibly even involving allies he
may have found within the city’s administration at the time. Understanding these
records from the perspective of a federal law enforcement agency is an
especially important factor in releasing these historical documents. In the case
of Jon Burge, the FBI has notified us that there are a “voluminous amount of
records” they’ve kept on him - an estimated 5,000-plus pages.

The battle to ensure these tactics are never used against the public again
continues. With the revelations of other possible illegal CPD-built detention
sites such as [Homan Square](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/05/homan-square-chicago-thousands-detained )
being utilized in the past decade, we need to ensure that now–just as then–we
are always holding those in positions of authority accountable for their
actions.

A copy of the suit, _Jake Ader v Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department
of Justice_ can be found
[online](https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/6155321-FBI-FOIA-suit-Jon-Burge-Records.html).
Lucy Parsons Labs has previously filed a [FOIA
lawsuit](https://gizmodo.com/fbi-sued-over-files-of-dead-hacker-who-turned-in-chelse-1835010385)
against the FBI for public records.
